Karen Hao: 0:00
What does this actually achieve? I guess,
like the narrative that OpenAI tried to say
was, by doing this, we will be able to continue
developing AI for the betterment of humanity.
That's why it's called OpenAI, and I think
that's fiction. Microsoft has invested tens
of billions I mean on paper, like what's been
announced is they've invested over 12 billion
in OpenAI. Microsoft's fate is tied to this
company significantly. I suspect that this
is not the end of the drama. I don't actually
think that this resolution is going to be
okay, great, like everything is back to normal.
Craig Smith: 0:39
This episode is sponsored by ISS, a leading
global provider of video intelligence and
data awareness solutions. Founded in 1996
and headquartered in Woodbridge, New Jersey,
ISS offers a robust portfolio of AI-powered,
high trust video analytics for streamlining
security, safety and business operations within
a wide range of vertical markets. So what
do you want to know about your environment?
To learn more about ISS' video intelligence
solutions, visit issvscom. That's issvs.com
they support us, so let's support them. Hi,
I'm Craig Smith and this is my AI. In this
episode, I talked to Karen Hao, a fellow journalist
who is now a contributing writer at the Atlantic.
She was previously writing for the Wall Street
Journal in Hong Kong and before that for MIT
Technology Review. She's the journalist with
probably the best insight into open AI and
we talked about the events of the past week.
Karen knows the players, knows open AI's history
and has some unique insights into what happened
and what we're likely to see in the future.
Beyond open AI, we talked about the likelihood
of artificial general intelligence happening
in the near future, as well as the existential
risk that many AI researchers are concerned
about. I hope you find the conversation as
fascinating as I did.
Karen Hao: 2:28
My name is Karen Hao. I am currently a contributing
writer to the Atlantic and also writing a
book about the AI industry through the lens
of open AI's rise and impacts around the world.
I became a tech journalist very much by accident.
I had studied engineering in college and then
I worked in Silicon Valley at a startup and
in the first year of working there I saw very
rapidly the ills of Silicon Valley, if you
will. The startup I was working for, the CEO,
was fired, so actually very relevant to today's
weekend's events. The CEO was fired by the
board and I became very disenchanted with
the progression of events that followed around
both leading up to and after the firing of
the CEO. So I was looking for other opportunities
and I wasn't really convinced that I would
be able to find something different within
the Valley. So I had this vague inkling at
the time that I would enjoy journalism, in
part because I had always enjoyed writing
and I was particularly interested at the time
in climate change and how do you incentivize
mass groups of people to change their minds
and change their behaviours and originally
I thought tech was the means to do that. Then
I started thinking maybe actually journalism
is the means to do that, like you need to
really build public opinion and public support
for the science around something before people
are going to act on it. So I started working
as an environmental reporter for my first
job, but when I was looking for it was an
internship and when I was looking for full-time
opportunities it was very difficult for me
to get hired as an environmental reporter
because I didn't really have that kind of
background. But consistently I was asked would
you be on our tech desk instead, because of
the background that I had, and so I ended
up becoming a tech reporter and then I became
an AI reporter, also not because I chose it,
but because it was a job that was available.
And then it became sort of the perfect match
for me because I was really really fascinated
by AI technologies and I actually had a lot
of friends from college that had gone into
AI research, sort of on the other side. So
I was able to kind of quickly embed myself
in the community and I realised that it was
this microcosm of exploring all of the narratives
that we have about technology the promise
of it, the power, the potential, the societal
impact, the sort of moneyed interests that
are involved, the egos that are involved,
and so I ended up reporting on that for now
more than five years.
Craig Smith: 5:39
Yeah, and you were at MIT Tech Review, correct?
Karen Hao: 5:43
I was at MIT Technology Review and then I
went to the Wall Street Journal and then I
joined contributing writer at the Atlantic
and while I was at MIT Tech Review I guess
this gets to your other question of when did
I embed in open AI While I was at MIT Tech
Review, our focus was really on trying to
cover, like, the bleeding edge of AI research.
So, whereas you know, the journal takes a
very different stance, it's like the journal
covered technologies that are starting to
be commercialised, that are starting to have
some kind of business potential. Mit Tech
Review was like if it had business potential,
it was ready too late, right? So it was always
about what we try to call the trends before
they happen? And because of that, we started
covering open AI very quickly after they were
founded. They were founded at the end of 2015,
and we probably started covering their research
in 2017, because that's when they started
producing some stuff that was starting to
push the boundaries. And then in 2019, I can't
really remember like how this came up, but
I basically had a discussion with my editor
at the time where I was like I think Open
AI is sort of just a really interesting lab
and there hasn't really been that much coverage
of it Like we've covered its research but
we haven't really covered its people and they
were starting to become just prominent enough
within the tech world that it felt like it
was a worthwhile thing to do. And my editor
at the time said you should just profile them.
And so I reached out to the company. They
already knew me pretty well because I had
been covering their research and I said, hey,
you've never had a profile done before. I
think I would be the best person to do it.
I think MIT Tech Review would be the best
publication. And let me come to the office
for three days and sit in on some meetings,
chat with researchers, chat with executives.
So that's what I did. I ended up flying to
San Francisco from Boston and then I spent
the three days there, and this was at the
end of 2019. So this was a really, really
interesting period of time in the company's
history, because I went there a month after
Microsoft invested a billion dollars into
the research lab. So in that year of 2019,
the GPT-2 announcement happened, which GPT-2
was. As listeners may remember, it was a few
generations before chat, gpt and initially,
openai took the stance of not releasing the
model, but announcing to the world that they
had developed it. So that happened at the
start of the year and then it was a really
big controversial decision because people
thought like why would you announce it but
then not release it? That's really odd. And
then the capped profit arm was created within
this nonprofit entity. Sam Altman joined as
a CEO and then the billion dollar investment
happened. So it was a rapid succession of
changes that made clear that the company which
was a nonprofit was quickly evolving into
sort of a company and that it was sort of
positioning itself to become bigger and bigger
and more influential.
Craig Smith: 9:14
Yeah, yeah. And that GPT-2 debacle is how
I regarded it was sort of the first glimpse
of what was to come, because they said they
developed it but it was too dangerous to release
and it was so everyone. Of course that got
everybody excited like what the hell is this
thing? And then there were limited people,
who were invited to review it, the creation
of I mean, in your article, in the Atlantic
article, and it's really what I wanted to
talk to you about. You have a line and I think
it's what a lot of people are thinking and
concerned about and I'm gonna try and find
it here if I can find where I opened it. I
don't have it open, but you have a line about
how this most important and powerful technology
mankind has ever developed is controlled by
half a dozen people who are fighting among
themselves. And that's kind of frightening.
And the whole sort of fiction of the nonprofit
with a profit, even if it's a cap profit,
subsidiary. I wanted to ask if that is fiction
as well? I mean, it's all the same people.
It's like you and I have a nonprofit, oh,
and you and I also have a profit arm. It's
not like we put on one hat and we're a nonprofit,
we take it off and we're a profit seeking
company. So is there anything real? Is that
just a fig leaf from your point of view? And
what do you think about this kind of technology
being in the hands of such a few people, and
people who evidently can't necessarily agree?
Karen Hao: 11:35
So I think the nonprofit for profit arm, I
mean it's interesting. The people that designed
that structure were Sam Altman, Greg Brockman
and Ilya Satskever, who ended up becoming
the main characters of the weekend. I can't
personally speak for what Sam believed when
he designed this because I never spoke to
him about it, but I spoke with Greg extensively
about it during the time that I was embedded
within the company and he genuinely thought
that this was the solution to raise. They
were trying to solve a problem. They realised
that AI development, the type of AI development
that they wanted to pursue, would be very,
very expensive and they needed to raise more
money than a nonprofit could help them raise.
And they tried to. I remember Greg said this
to me during that time that I was embedded.
He was like we did actually try because, like
this notion of having this nonprofit was very,
very like near and dear to us. So we didn't
wanna just immediately go like let's scrap
it and move for a for-profit. So this like
at least for Brockman he genuinely thought
that this was like a really clever solution
that they'd come up with to solve this problem
of needing the money but also staying a nonprofit.
But the thing is. It's like what is, what
does this actually achieve? I guess, like,
maybe the fiction is that this, the narrative,
that opening I tried to say was by doing this,
we will be able to continue developing AI
for the betterment of humanity and with the
participation of humanity. This was a really
big part of their early days. Messaging as
well was like they were going to be open,
they were going to be transparent. That's
why it's called open AI. I think that's fiction.
The non-profit for-profit is solving the specific
problem that they wanted to solve. I think
that is, you know, like they were genuinely
trying to solve this very particular problem.
But does it actually get us more open, more
transparent, participatory AI development?
No, not at all. What it actually does is just
entrenched the power of the people that designed
this thing. And ironically, I mean what we
saw this weekend was that the non-profit for-profit
did end up working as designed, in that the
board did in fact, do what their job was to
vote out Sam for like not aligning with the
mission, supposedly. But then the reaction
that we see from Sam, from Greg and ultimately
from Ilya, when Ilya flipped, suggests that
they're not actually here for this mechanism
to be used against them, right. But if the
mechanism were designed with like true sincerity
of maybe one day I'd actually ask Greg, I'd
ask like would you ever consider firing yourself
if you felt that you were no longer up for
the job, which I could have even phrased it
as, would you be open to the board firing
you or the board firing the CEO if they evaluate?
And at the time he said like I would be open
to it, but clearly like they weren't actually
open to it, right. So that's the fiction that
I think kind of became very plainly displayed
this week?
Craig Smith: 15:26
Yeah, and the board is the board of the nonprofit,
is that right?
Karen Hao: 15:31
The board? Yes, the board is part of the nonprofit
and the nonprofit governs the capped profit,
and that's why the board was able to exercise
the power that had been bestowed upon them
with this legal structure to vote out Sam.
Craig Smith: 15:48
Yeah, it'll be interesting to see if that
nonprofit profit structure survives, because
it doesn't seem to make a lot of sense. I
mean, going back to GPT2, that was the thing
that upset a lot of people Open AI. Open AI
was supposed to be kind of an answer to big
tech, to Google specifically, and that they
are going to be open source, they're going
to share all their research. It's not going
to be controlled by a for profit entity, and
maybe that was just naive, that when anyone
develops anything that has such profit potential,
they're not. The logic is that they need to
raise funds and investors need to have some
profit participation, otherwise they won't
invest. I mean, ultimately, this kind of technology
is not going to survive under a nonprofit
umbrella, I think. But more specifically,
I talk and I know you do too to Yan Likun,
who I have enormous respect for. I mean, obviously
he's a genius, but I mean in terms of his
opinions on things like open source versus
proprietary research, and do you think that
this kind of tech should be open source, regardless
of the dangers of open sourcing? Incredibly
powerful technology, but simply to avoid this
sort of thing, that then you have the broader
research community working on it, refining
it and then some sort of a licence structure
that allows people to use it, whether it's
for research or commercial use.
Karen Hao: 18:07
Yeah, I think it's a great question. To be
honest, I haven't fully made up my mind about
whether to fully open source technologies
like these, but certainly we need more transparency
than we need now. I think that is very, very
clear. And also, what's interesting, I will
say that Yann has been a big advocate of open
source or of transparency, but Meta's Llama
2 model does not actually technically fit
the definition of open source. They open sourced
the model weights but by definition, they
would also need to open source the data in
order for people to audit it, to understand
how it works. And Meta has refused to release
any information about the data that it was
trained on, and this is something that I think
could easily become like a very low stakes
accountability measure. Is releasing the data?
Just saying what's in the data already is
a huge step forward and you haven't trained
the model, like the data is not the model.
So if you're worried, if we were to buy into
the idea that open sourcing the model could
have dangerous potential, open sourcing the
data would not. But the fact that we don't
have any understanding whatsoever of what
is being used to train these models, I think
is a very telling sign of why actually these
companies that say that they can't open source
the technologies was the true motivation behind
their arguments.
Craig Smith: 19:43
And do you think that's because they're afraid
of liability? Absolutely yeah.
Karen Hao: 19:49
Absolutely. I think they're afraid of liability,
of reputation damage, because a lot of the
content that is put into these systems is
not actually vetted very well, and that's
precisely why open sourcing would create safer
systems, because if you force companies to
open source, they would have to significantly
do more work to clean up the data sets, which
would actually result in better products.
And if you have many more scientists within
the community, many more other people within
the community going through like more eyes
on these data sets, they will naturally just
become better. And I think it would also be
a forcing function to then get to a place
where, like some of the companies are now
doing this, where they're striking data deals,
where they actually purchase the data from
a media company or from Shutterstock or whatever
it is. That came very late in the stage of
the AI development that we're in. All of the
original models were not developed with these
data deals, and now the companies can continue
to profit off of the data that wasn't paid
for and that wasn't. They weren't being transparent
about it. But if we had more of this transparency,
it would be a forcing function to accelerate
this trend, which I think is a really good
one. There should be payments for data and
potentially even dividend payments to the
data providers, data creators, over time.
Craig Smith: 21:27
Yeah, yeah, that's. That's an interesting
idea that you know. I know you know the same
people. I knew that Don Song at Berkeley has
been working on this idea of, you know, using
the blockchain to secure your data and then
Be able to sell it and have kind of this lifelong
income stream coming from it, which sounds
great to me. Now that I'm close to retirement,
it would be nice to have an income stream
off the data that every company Used of mine.
Yeah, so when do you think I mean Sam and
Greg? Or back at open AI? I, Ilya, feel bad
for myself. You know I've interviewed such
a Deep soul. You know he clearly didn't mean
to cause this, this Global ruckus. Helen toner,
I feel bad for her. She's been raked over
the coals, people have made fun of her research
and where do you think this is going to go?
I, I, I can't imagine that. I think they're.
They're what three people on the new board
that again, with this technology, as critical
as it is, I would assume at the very least,
Microsoft will have a seat on the board. Where
do you think it's? It's going to go in open
AI's case and then we can talk about sort
of government regulation. I would think that
Regulators would be looking at this and saying
you know, we can't have a bunch of you know
30-somethings in Silicon Valley like. Yeah,
yielding the future of the world.
Karen Hao: 23:30
So yeah, I Think for open AI's case, I suspect
that this is not the end of the drama. I don't
actually think this resolution is going to
be okay, great, like everything is back to
normal, Sam's installed, all happy and peaceful
and all you know. Like the piece that I wrote
in the Atlantic talks about how there's all
these different factions with the company,
different ideologies. They all are kind of
in this power struggle and I really do think
that the more powerful a technology is, the
more you end up with a game of throne style
power struggle, because people think, very,
believe very strongly in their ideology for
how AI should be developed and it's both like
this belief that's like a true, genuine belief
and also, of course, like there is elements
of desire for power, desire for control, and
We've seen open AI go through different waves
of drama before. So this is just the third
way. If you, I guess you could call it like
the Elon Musk leaving. Open AI was the first
wave and then the anthropic open AI split
was the second wave and now this is the third
wave. There's definitely something else that's
gonna come, but in terms of what this means,
I guess for the course of AI development.
I suspect that Sam is Certainly going to be
a lot wiser about selecting carefully, he's
choosing his board members and trying to make
sure that he entrenched his power again. So
if that is the case, then his specific ethos
and his sort of habit around rapid commercialization,
rapid growth, is going to now be like the
main driving seat of the organisation and
that is going to continue. We're going to
see way more proliferation of products, way
more downstream companies building on top
of it and, unfortunately, I think we will
see way more Ripple effects, negative ripple
effects as well as speed overtakes. You know
Certain types of trust and safety concerns,
for example, and so I think that that's probably
the most likely scenario, but also it's really
hard to know. It's really hard to know because
I don't know if you saw there was like that,
that that letter that was circulating, open
letter to the board from former employees.
So it's like is that going to be yet another
episode in this particular weekend saga, or
Are we, is it buried for now and we don't
see something else for another one to two
years?
Craig Smith: 26:22
Yeah, yeah. And then you've got Microsoft
and you know Satya's is public, they all smile
and everything's fine. But you can imagine.
Karen Hao: 26:36
I've been sweating like crazy. Microsoft has
invested Tons of billions I mean on paper,
like what's been announced is they've invested
like something like over 12 billion In opening
up. But it's way more than that in the sense
that when you look at their Investor, like
their latest investor statement, they say
that they're planning on laying down more
than 50 billion dollars in new data centres
for next year, and Not all of that is to our
opening AI, but they're laying that down because
they're selling to Azure their cloud compute
customers. This idea of the Microsoft open
AI partnership and this is why Microsoft stock
has been doing so well as it is Bank. It banks
on this partnership. So, like you know, when
the news came and like, the Microsoft stock
immediately started dropping and now that,
like, things are back to normal, Microsoft
stock is increasing. Microsoft's fate is tied
to this company Significantly, significantly.
Craig Smith: 27:45
So, yeah, yeah, although a brilliant move,
because at one point it looked and this is
well you know all over Twitter and commentators
who say but that he in effect had acquired
open AI or was on the cusp of a AI, without
having any, any regulatory interference or
even having to pay a premium, actually paying
a discount. So, yeah, adjust. In the data
centres this is something I've Been talking
to people about. This technology is is so
much promise for enterprise, but because of
the constraint in in available compute, which,
which goes all the way back to, you know,
silicone starts at the foundry, but but then
through to to Nvidia and and their limited
supply, you can't actually build and deploy
a heavy use enterprise application Using GPT
for through an API, just the, the pipe through
which you're sending your tokens Is too narrow.
Is this investment by Microsoft intended to
ease that? What do you think about that? That
constraint, how long will that last?
Karen Hao: 29:27
um, I definitely think that. Yeah, I do think
that Microsoft's investments are meant to
try and facilitate all of their customer base
to transition to an AI forward business. I
suppose, because I mean, every, every company
that I've been talking to these days, regardless
of what industry they're in, is suddenly Alert
to the idea that they need some kind of AI
strategy. And all of the tech giants Microsoft,
google as AWS, amazon are all trying to capture
that new Market and they're trying to build
out their infrastructure to also facilitate
that integration with these, these business
customers and I Mean it's I personally, I
I think there's sort of two interesting things
that I'm personally watching for. One is how
much of this talk is going to actually convert
into implementation, because a lot of the
companies I talk to say they need the AI strategy,
but they're actually not sure what that means
and whether or not it would ultimately be
valuable for their business. It is valuable
right now for their business to talk about
it, but will it actually be valuable later
to implement it? That's one thing to look
out for, then, I guess the second thing is
whether or not these companies, these Cloud
providers that are jockeying for Market Share,
are even able to acquire the resources necessary
to continue laying down the data centres to
keep up with this kind of demand. I think
those are two things that could potentially
end up limiting AI adoption or bottlenecking
adoption, but it's difficult to tell right
now what that will actually look like in five
years time maybe.
Craig Smith: 31:28
Yeah. Have you heard anything that you haven't
published or that you have published about
this idea of Sam Altman starting a chip company
or open AI? Starting a chip company to compete
with Nvidia?
Karen Hao: 31:48
Only what's reported. My understanding is
that this is not a new idea for him, that
it was something that he'd always been interested
in but had never, maybe not taken seriously
before I'm not sure. But then it became much
more real and viable, potentially and potentially
a smart business decision to be able to actually
have that. But the thing is I don't know that.
People fully understand sometimes that it
doesn't matter how many chip companies we
have. We only have one real chip manufacturer,
which is the SMC. You're not going to get,
I mean, samsung as well and a couple other
companies that are able to produce these chips,
but TSMC is the most consistent provider and
everyone wants to use them. No matter how
many chip companies you have. There's still
that bottleneck. I'm not really sure what
Sam's plan was with that, whether he was trying
to create his own chip company to get around
the waiting list for Nvidia, or whether he
was doing it for something else, like maybe
for optimising, like trying to get to the
next stage of AI development, maybe by trying
to optimise how model training works by going
to the hardware level. I'm not really sure.
Craig Smith: 33:20
Yeah yeah. A lot of people don't understand
that when people talk about chip companies,
they're not actually manufacturing the silicone
chips, they're designing chips. I love the
bit in the article about Ilya chanting the
AGI. I'm a big AGI sceptic. I agree with Yanlacun
again. I mean a lot of his ideas really resonate
with me that the language models are not the
way to AGI. I mean they'll certainly advance
to something. As a journalist, a very well-informed
journalist, what's your feeling about that?
Do you think I get comments all the time on
various things that I post AGI we're going
to reach super intelligence sometime next
year. It's like really, yeah, what's your
sense of that?
Karen Hao: 34:38
My feeling is that we don't have any agreed
definition of AGI. Agi could be here if you
define it based on what we have, or it could
be 100 years away if you define it totally
differently. For the people who are saying
super intelligence might be here soon, even
scientifically, we don't have an agreed upon
definition of intelligence. I'm not talking
about AI. I'm talking about biology, psychology
and neuroscience. There's no agreed upon definition
of intelligence. I'm sure that the people
that are saying these things totally agree
with them. It's just like you get to define
yourself what the goal is and where to go.
I think this is the fundamental problem of
the AI industry as a whole, as illustrated
this weekend by OpenAI, is that by setting
a goal towards something that is completely
undefined, you just get to do whatever you
want. I'd say that it's under the banner of
a thing that sounds really nice and magical,
even and de facto good, but ultimately the
AGI is actually just a rhetorical tool to
continue advancing towards whatever you want
to advance towards.
Craig Smith: 36:05
Yeah, although I think we all have an idea
of people who are paying attention to the
space, of what it would look and feel like.
I really like Yanlacoon's world model research
because it's grounded in language. You layer
on top of that. Ilia is a student of Jeff
Hinton's. Jeff is now beating the existential
risk gong. What do you think about that? Because,
again, I lean more towards Yan and his view
that it's certainly their risks, but this
existential risk is a bridge too far.
Karen Hao: 37:09
So I've talked with Hinton about this. Actually,
what actually changed his mind about this
thing? Because he changed his mind. He's sort
of relatively recently, and it was specifically
that he realised that the definition again
this goes back to definitions the definition
that he was using for superintelligence before
was potentially the wrong benchmark and that
he should actually just be observing the ability
of these technologies, that we have to engage
with the real world and influence people and
cause like real world phenomenon, and that
we had already reached a point where it was
causing like mass real world phenomenon it
was like and large scale influence, you know
and that, whereas humans are very lossy in
our ability to transfer knowledge, that digital
intelligence, as he was calling it, digital
intelligence is not like you could have multiple
models that immediately combine their knowledge.
I'm saying all this in quotes because I think
it's sort of important to emphasise that there
are lots of debates around, like the use of
these terminology, but that the, that digital
models would be able to combine instantly,
transfer knowledge instantly, and then that
is how you would reach superintelligence.
I am extremely sceptical of these claims as
well. I think that Hinton believes what he
believes and has a very logical path for what
he believes. I also think that ultimately,
like who likes me it's sort of like you would
have to have it. We don't have very good techniques
right now for developing advanced capabilities
without massive data centres. So it doesn't
to me it doesn't make sense that we should
fear like 100 models suddenly combining into
one. Who's training those 100 models? Like
these models are exorbitantly expensive. Dario
mode, a CEO of Anthropics, said publicly on
stage earlier this year that currently the
industry is training models that are around
$100 million of cost. Then it's going to be
a billion dollars of cost and he could see
in two years there is a reaching $10 billion
of cost. I mean there is not. Like are we
going to train $110 billion models and then
worry about them combining into superintelligence?
I and like, where are we getting the data
from for this? From, I think it immediately
hits the real world limitations. But you know,
like the scientists that have been working
on these things for a long time, they have
a very I think they sometimes have tunnel
vision about the things that they research
and they're not necessarily spending a lot
of time out in the world like they're. They're
like in their lab and like thinking about
these things from a mathematical, theoretical
perspective. And if you were to think about
it from that perspective, then certainly I
think you would start to get to some alarming
conclusions. But yeah, that's sort of my view
on it.
Craig Smith: 40:28
This episode is sponsored by ISS, a leading
global provider of video intelligence and
data awareness solutions. Founded in 1996
and headquartered in Woodbridge, New Jersey,
it offers a robust portfolio of AI powered,
high trust video analytics for streamlining
security, safety and business operations within
a wide range of vertical markets. So what
do you want to know about your environment?
To learn more about ISS video intelligence
solutions, visit issvscom. That's issvs.com
they support us, so let's support them. That's
it for this episode. I want to thank Karen
for her time. If you want to learn more about
what we talked about today, you can find a
transcript on our website IonAI, that's e-y-e-onai.
And in the meantime, remember the singularity
may not be near, but AI is changing your world,
so pay attention.